---
title: "Which Way Western Man: SQL or NoSQL?"
publishedAt: "2024-12-31"
summary: "How I chose the right database for my next side quest"
---

I spent a lot of time wondering which database to use for my new project. I
looked into various database options, hosting providers, and ORMs such as
Prisma, Drizzle, and Mongoose. Each had its strengths and weaknesses, with many
offering first-class support for Next.js, but I eventually settled for a NoSQL
MongoDB database. The choice of database almost always depends primarily on the
use case; almost everything is secondary. Popular ORMs have very similar APIs as
well, so whether the app uses a SQL or a NoSQL database behind the scenes makes
relatively little difference to the application logic, beyond the initial setup.

In this case, I needed the database to perform quick reads across multiple
collections/tables; for example, every time a post is fetched, I'd have to fetch
likes and comments as well. This is where MongoDB shines, as MongoDB's schema
design aligns closely with this app's data access patterns: I can store arrays
of references to the five most recent likes and comments directly in a post
document, so that when the feed is loaded, MongoDB can quickly fetch the small
set of likes and comments using the `_id`, which is automatically indexed. Since
relational databases favor normalization, this design choice would not be
encouraged, but in MongoDB databses, this is a common practice. Furthermore,
MongoDB offers advanced indexing capabilities. In the notification collection, I
create a composite index on `(recipient, created_at)`, so that I can quickly
query a user's notifications in sorted order.

PostgreSQL would have been great for ensuring data consistency. With a
normalized relational design, I would've kept foreign keys to the posts table in
the likes and comments tables. When a post is deleted, `ON DELETE CASCADE` would
have automatically deleted that post's likes and comments from their respective
tables. This eliminates the need for manual cleanup, as PostgreSQL automatically
handles it in a single transaction. While MongoDB does not offer built-in
referential integrity, it now supports multi-document transactions. This would
allow me to delete a post along with its associated likes and comments in one
atomic operation, achieving a similar level of consistency. Although this
introduces additional overhead, it does not warrant the use of a SQL database
here, since such high consistency is not a priority for this project.

Perhaps the most important benefit of using a NoSQL database here is its
schemaless design, which makes it far more fleixble than any SQL database. As an
indie developer, I'm iterating over the app very quickly, and I want to be able
to make changes fast. With PostgreSQL, there's the additional overhead of
maintaining referential integrity across normalized tables, so I would have to
perform database migrations every time I wanted to make a change to how or what
data is stored. MongoDB eliminates this by representing data as standalone items
in collections, eliminating rigid schemas. Additionally, Mongoose offers type
safety, which helps ensure the consistency and integrity of the data while still
facilitating rapid iteration.

Lastly, database hosting options were also an important consideration. Since the
project is going to be hosted on Vercel, the obvious choice was using Vercel
Postgres. This option offered some advantages, such as low latency Postgres
queries from Edge functions. However, I would have to write raw SQL queries
using Vercel's Postgres SDK and not an ORM, which would have introduced high
development overhead. Additionally, database options are quite limited on
Vercel's hobby plan, and with Vercel Pro, costs can accrue really fast. Other
managed PostgreSQL options include services from popular cloud providers such as
AWS, MongoDB offers relatively cheaper shared clusters, which, by design, can be
sharded quite easily without additional effort. In the future, if I want to
migrate to a different NoSQL database, such as Amazon's DynamoDB, I expect to be
able to do it relatively easily for this simple database design using Amazon's
Database Migration Service.
